# 2.0 Building Abstractions with Data

- In the last chapter we saw how the ability to build abstractions through compound procedures improved the expressive power of our language and enabled us to build much complex operations through composing less complex ones. But all the procedures we dealt with so far are dealing with primitive data(numbers). If we want to model real-world phenomena, then dealing with only primitive data is insufficient. Because in the real world we are dealing with much complex objects having many parts.

- In this chapter we are looking at how to represent and deal with complex objects and how building and abstracting compound data will elevate the conceptual level at which we can design programs, increase program modularity, and help building programs that are easy to maintain and modify.

- We need to build modular programs in which we separate the parts that represent data from the parts that use data(**data abstraction**) and build abstraction bariers between those parts.

- If we are to build a procedure to form a linear combination `ax + by`, we might write a procedure that accepts `a`, `b`, `x`, and `y` and returns the result:

```
(define (linear-combination a b x y)
  (+ (* a x) (* b y)))
```

This is suffiient if we're dealing only with numbers. But suppose that we deal also with rational numbers, complex numbers, ploynomials, or whatever. We need to be able to write a procedure in this form:

```
(define (linear-combination a b x y)
  (sum (mul a x) (mul b y)))
```

where `sum` and `mul` are not the primitive `+` and `*` but rather complex operations that know how to manipulate any type of data: numbers, rational numbers, complex numbers, or even polynomials. Here, for the procedure `linear-combination` it should be irrelevant what `a`, `b`, `x`, and `y` are and how they are represented as long as `add` and `mul` know how to manipulate them.
