# 3 Modularity, Objects, and State

- In the previous chapters we discussed the basic elements or programming and how primitive data and procedures can be combined together to construct complex computational objects. We also discussed how abstraction is vital in controlling the complexity of a system and raising our conceptual ability to describe things.

- Although what we described till now is grear, it is not sufficient when it comes to building complex systems. Building complex systems requires following **organizational priniciples** that can help building modular systems in a **natural** way.

- The benefit of following **organizational principles** is that extending the system will not require strategic changes. Only following the same thing.

- The way we organiza systems is dictated by our perception of the system to be modeled. During this chapter we will discuss 2 prominent **organizational strategies**:

  - **Object-based strategy (Object-oriented programming)**
    In this strategy, we view the system as a collection of objects with changing behavior over time depending on object's state. We model system objects using computational objects, state using local state variables, change using assignment and behavior using procedures that uses those state variables. Introducing **assinment** and **change** comes with benefits and cost that we will discuss later.
  - **Stream-processing strategy (Functional programming)**
    In this strategy, we view the system as a flow of information exactly like a signal processing system.

- A **strategy** is a plan for acheiving long-term goals.
