# 3.1 Assignment and Local State

- Normally we view the world as a set of objects. Each of which has changing state and hence changing behavior. An object is said to have changing state when its behavior depends on its history. For example a bank accout can or cannot be withdrawn by 100$ based on the history of withdrawls and deposits for this bank account.

- We can model an object's history using one or more state variables that capture sufficient information about the history. For example, A bank account might need one state variable to maintain the available balance. This information is sufficient for defining the behavior of the bank account at any time. This is much efficient than remembering the entire history of it.

- If we are going to model state variables as ordinary symbols in our language, then we must be able to **update** the value associated with a given symbol. This is called **assignment**.

- To build a modular system, we have to construct computational objects that keep track its internal state. Idealy each computational object's state can be changed by the object itself only. But this is not how the world behaves. Usually different objects affect each other's state. To keep our system modular, we can group each related objects in a cloosely coupled subsystem that is loosely coupled with other subsystems.

## 3.1.1 Local State Variables

- To understand what it means to have a state that changes over time, let's walkthrough an example trying to model bank account behavior.

- Assume that we have `withdraw` procedure that withdraws from a bank account. Assume that the initial value of the bank account is `100 $` and a call to `withdraw` either will decrease this amount and return the new one or will return `insufficient funds`.

```
(withdraw 50)
50

(withdraw 20)
30

(withdraw 50)
insufficient funds

(withdraw 10)
20
```

- Here, we see a completely new behavior of procedure application. Calling `(withdraw 50)` yields different results. This is not the thing that we have been dealing with in the previous chapters. Previously, applying a procedure to the same arguments multiple times yields the same results each time. This is because the procedure was modeling a mathematical function. But this is not the case now after we're introducing **assignment**.

- Let's implement `withdraw`:

```
(define balance 100)

(define (withdraw amount)
  (if (> balance amount)
      (begine (set! balance (- balance amount))
              balance)
      "insufficient funds"))
```

- `set!` procedure is used to assign a new value to a symbol. Its general systax is `set! <name> <new-value>`. The exclamation mark at the end is a **scheme** convention for procedures that assigns.

- Although the previous implementation works, it presents a problem. The variable `balance` is globally accessible. It would be great if, somehow, we can make it accessible only to `withdraw` procedure to reflec the fact that it is a local state variable of `withdraw`

```
(define (withdraw)
  (let ((balance 100))
       (lamda (amount)
              (if (> balance amount)
                  (begine (set! balance (- balance amount))
                          balance)
                  "insufficient funds"))))
```

Here we defined the variable `balance` inside `withdraw` using `let` and `lamda` syntax. We're using `let` to give us local environment in which `balance` can live.

- We can also build `make-withdraw` procedure that returns `withdraw` procedure:

```
(define (make-withdraw balance)
  (lambda (amount)
          (if (>= balance amount)
              (begin (set! balance (- balance amount))
                      balance)
  "Insufficient funds")))
```

We can use it the same way:

```
(define W1 (make-withdraw 100))
(define W2 (make-withdraw 100))

(W1 50)
50

(W2 70)
30

(W2 40)
"Insufficient funds"

(W1 40)
10
```

The thing to notice here is that `W1` and `W2` are completely independent objects. Each of which has its own local environment and hence calls on one object does not affect the variable of the scond one.

- We can also define computational objects that handle both `withdraw` and `deposit` operations:

```
(define (make-account balance)
  (define (withdraw amount)
    (if (>= balance amount)
        (begin (set! balance (- balance amount))
              balance)
        "Insufficient funds"))

  (define (deposit amount)
    (set! balance (+ balance amount))
    balance)

  (define (dispatch m)
    (cond ((eq? m ’withdraw) withdraw)
          ((eq? m ’deposit) deposit)
          (else (error "Unknown request -- MAKE-ACCOUNT" m))))

dispatch)
```

This can be used as follows:

```
(define acc (make-account 100))

((acc ’withdraw) 50)
50

((acc ’withdraw) 60)
"Insufficient funds"

((acc ’deposit) 40)
90

((acc ’withdraw) 60)
30
```

Here we are making good use of **message passing** technique.

### Exercise 3.1

```
(define (make-accumulator initial)
  (let ((acc initial))
       (lambda (val)
               (Begin (set! acc (+ acc val))
                      acc))))
```

### Exercise 3.2

```
(define (make-monitored f)
  (define counter 0)
  (define (mf input)
    (cond ((equal? input 'how-many-calls?) counter)
          ((equal? input 'reset-count) (set! counter 0))
          (else Begin (set! counter (+ counter 1))
                      (f input))))
  mf)
```

### Exercise 3.3

```
(define (make-account balance password)
  (define (withdraw amount)
    (if (>= balance amount)
        (begin (set! balance (- balance amount))
              balance)
        "Insufficient funds"))

  (define (deposit amount)
    (set! balance (+ balance amount))
    balance)

  (define (dispatch pass m)
    (if (not (equal? password pass))
        (error "Incorrect password")
        (cond ((eq? m ’withdraw) withdraw)
              ((eq? m ’deposit) deposit)
              (else (error "Unknown request -- MAKE-ACCOUNT" m)))))

  dispatch)
```

### Exercise 3.4

```
(define (make-account balance password)
  (define incorrect-password-times 0)
  (define (withdraw amount)
    (if (>= balance amount)
        (begin (set! balance (- balance amount))
              balance)
        "Insufficient funds"))

  (define (deposit amount)
    (set! balance (+ balance amount))
    balance)

  (define (dispatch pass m)
    (if ((not (equal? password pass))
            (Begin (set! incorrect-password-times (+ incorrect-password-times 1))
              (if (= incorrect-password-times 7) (call-the-cops) (error "Incorrect password"))))
        (Begin (set! incorrect-password-times 0)
          (cond (((eq? m ’withdraw) withdraw)
                ((eq? m ’deposit) deposit)
                (else (error "Unknown request -- MAKE-ACCOUNT" m)))))))

  dispatch)
```

## 3.1.2 The Benefits of Introducing Assignment

- Let's walk through an example that illustrates the benefits of introducing assignment.

- Consider building a procedure `rand` that whenever called returns a random number. By random we mean that successive calls to `rand` generates a sequence of numbers that satisfies uniform distribution statistical properties. To simplify the mission, assume that we have a procedure `rand-update` that has the property that if we start with an initial number `x_1` then:

```
x_2 = rand_update(x_1)
x_3 = rand_update(x_2)
```

then the sequence `x_1, x_2, x_3, ...` will have the desired statistical properties. Then we can make use of this procedure along with assinment to build the desired `rand` procedure:

```
(define (rand)
  (let ((x random-init))
    (lambda ()
      (set! x (rand_update x))
      x)))
```

Here we defined an internal state variable that can maintain to let us use when calling `rand_update` and generate the desired sequence.

- Now we can use `rand` as a black-box that returns random numbers. Ofcourse we could do that without using assignment but that means our program will need to excplicitly maintain the values of `x` to be supplied to `rand-update`. To see how annoying is this, let's build a more complex example.

- Let's model a technique called **Monte Carlo** simulation which is basically a method for making deductions based on the probability of a given experiment. Using the fact that `6/[pi]^2` is the probability that 2 random integers will have no factors in common meaning that their **GCD** is `1`. **Monte Carlo** can help deduce the value of `pi` by running an experiment which picks 2 random integers and sees if theit **GCD** is `1` or not. By running this experiment many times, then calculating the fraction of times that the experiment has passed can give us the probability which can be used to deduce `pi`.

- The heart of our program is a procedure `monte-carlo` which accepts as arguments:
  - the number of times to run the experiment
  - the experiment to be run which is represented as a no-argument procedure that returns `true` or `false` based on the success or failure of the experiment

```
(define (estimate-pi trials)
  (sqrt (/ 6 (monte-carlo trials cesaro-test))))

(define (cesaro-test)
  (= (gcd (rand) (rand)) 1))

(define (monte-carlo trials experiment)
  (define (iter trials-remaining trials-passed)
    (cond
      ((= trials-remaining 0) (/ trials-passed trials))
      ((experiment) (iter (- trials-remaining 1) (+ trials-passed 1)))
      (else (iter (- trials-remaining 1) trials-passed))))
  (iter trials 0))
```

Notice that `rand` procedure(the assignment in fact) is the reason why we could represent `cesaro-test` as a no-argument procedure and also could define **monte-carlo** as an abstraction.

- If we do not use **assignment** and decided to go with `rand-update` then things will get a little complicated. At this case, the program that uses `rand-update` will have to remember `x` values then we do not have the ability to build `cesaro-test` as a no-argument procedure and we cannot build `monte-carlo` as an abstraction cuz it should remember those `x` values which is dependent on the experiment meaning that for this experience we will need to remember 2 `x`s but for another experiment we might need to remember more or less of those `x`s.

```
(define (estimate-pi trials)
  (sqrt (/ 6 (random-gcd-test trials random-init))))

(define (random-gcd-test trials initial-x)
  (define (iter trials-remaining trials-passed x)
    (let
      ((x1 (rand-update initial-x)) (x2 (rand-update x1)))
      (cond
        ((= trials-remaining 0) (/ trials-passed trials))
        ((= (gcd x1 x2) 1) (iter (- trials-remaining 1) (+ trials-passed 1) x2))
        (else (iter (- trials-remaining 1) trials-passed x2)))))
  (iter trials 0 initial-x))
```

While the program is still simple but the lack of ability to represent the experiment as a black-box resulted in inability to represent `monte-carlo` as an abstraction which breaks the **modularity** of the program. Using **assignment** and **local state** enabled us to build a modular program.

### Exercise 3.5

```
(define (estimate-integral p x1 x2 y1 y2 trials)
  (* (monte-carlo trials (exp p x1 x2 y1 y2)) (calc-rect-area x1 x2 y1 y2)))

(define (exp p x1 x2 y1 y2)
  (lamda
    ()
    (let
      ((x (random-in-range x1 x2)) (y (random-in-range y1 y2)))
      (p x y))))

(define (calc-rect-area x1 x2 y1 y2)
  (* (- x2 x1) (- y2 y1)))
```

### Exercise 3.6

```
(define rand
  (define x some-val)
  (define (generate)
    (set! x (rand-update x))
    x)
  (define (reset val)
    (set! x val))
  (define (dispatch m)
    (cond
      (eq? m 'generate generate)
      (eq? m 'reset reset)
      (else (error "incorrect arg"))))
  dispatch)
```

## 3.1.3 The Costs of Introducing Assignment

- We saw how intorducing assignment through `set!` operation helps us build modular programs. But this advantage comes with a cost. The substitution model of procedure application introduced before is no longer sufficient for interpreting our programming language.

- As long as we do not use assignment, 2 procedure application with the same argument will yield the same result. Procedure in that case are just computing methematical functions. This paradigm of programming which does not use assignment is known as **functional programming**.

- To understand how introducing assignment deprecates the substitution model of procedure application, let's take 2 examples: one that uses assignment and the other does not and let's see how the substitution model fits for each.

- The example that uses assignment is a procedure that model bank account withdrawl operations:

```
(define (make-simplified-withdraw balance)
  (lambda
    (amount)
    (set! balance (- balance amount))
    balance))

(define W (make-simplified-withdraw 25))

(W 20)
5

(W 10)
-5
```

- The example that does not use assignment is a procedure that models decrementer:

```
(define (make-decrementer balance)
  (lambda (amount)
    (- balance amount)))

(define D (make-decrementer 25))

(D 20)
5

(D 10)
15
```

- Let's test the substitution model for each example:

  - For the decrementer, let's see how the substitution model works for this expression:

  ```
  ((make-decrementer 25) 20)
  ```

  We first simplify the exression bu substituting `make-decrementer` with its body replacing `balance` with `25`

  ```
  ((lambda (amount) (- 25 amount)) 20)
  ```

  Now let's replace `amount` with `20`

  ```
  (- 25 20)
  5
  ```

  - For the banc account example, let's see how the substitution model works for this expression:

  ```
  ((make-simplified-withdraw 25) 20)
  ```

  first let's substitute `make-simplified-withdraw` with its body replacing `balance` with `25`

  ```
  ((lambda
    (amount)
    (set! balance (- 25 amount))
    25) 20)
  ```

  Now let's replace `amount` with `20`

  ```
  ((set! balance (- 25 20)) 25)
  25
  ```

  We get the wrong answer since now symbols are not simply names to values as we defined before. Introducing assignment makes symbols places in which values reside and values in those places can change. Our substitution model should differentiate between `balance` before applying `set!` operation and after.

### Sameness and change
