# 3.2 The Environment Model of Evaluation

- As we introduce assignment in our programming language, the substitution model of evaluation which evaluates procedure application by evaluating its body replacing formal parameters with actuall arguments is no longer adequate. We've seen in the previous session the reason behind this and how introducing assignment makes this substitution model fails to get the correct result.

- Now we need our substitution model to treat variables not as **names for values** but as **places for values** and those values might change at any point. To do this, we will adopt a structure called the **environment**.

- An **environment** is a sequence of frames. Each frame is a set of bindings. A binding is a record of variable name and its value. Each frame has a pointer to its enclosing environment.

- The value of a variable is found in the first frame that has a binding for that variable. If all frames are examined and no bindings are found then the variable is said to be **unbound** in the environment.

- After introducing the notion of **environment**, an expression is no longer meaningful unles it is evaluated in a given environment. Even a very simple expression like `(+ 1 1)` does not have a meaning unless we identify its environment which defines what is the meaning of all its parts which are the smbol `+` and the numeral `1`.

## 3.2.1 The Rules of Evaluation

- Treating procedures as mathematical functions and using the **substitutiom model of evaluation**, to apply a procedure to arguments, all we have to do is to evaluate the body of the procedure substituting formal parameters with the values of the arguments. Now let's see what it means to apply a procedure to arguments using the **environment model of evaluation**.

- We start by checking what happens when defining a procedure before applying it. So let's see what happens to evaluate:

```
(define (square x) (* x x))
```

`define` is just a syntactic sugar over `lambda` expressions. So this is equivalent to the following:

```
(define square (lambda (x) (* x x)))
```

Evaluating this expression leads to adding a new binding in the global environemnt for the symbol `square` with the value of a procedure object. No what is a procedure object? A procedure object is simply 2 things(code and a pointer to an environment). The code to be executed wehen calling the procedure which is the lambda text. The pointer points to the environment where the lambda expression has been evaluated in.

For `square` the procedure object will look like this

```
code: (x) => x * x
environment: global
```

- Now to evaluate the expression `(square 5)`, what happens is that any procedure application leads to creating a new environment with a frame that has formal parameters bound to corresponding arguments and this new enviornment's enclosing environment is the one specified by the procedure object. So evaluating `(square 5)` leads to creating a new environment with a frame that has a binding for `x: 5`. This new environment, call it `E1`, has as its enclosing environment the global one since it is the environment of the procedure object bound to `square` in the global environment. Within this new environment `* x x` is evaluated and `x` can be found to be `5` then `* 5 5` results in returning `25`.

- We also specify what `set!` does which is the thing that pushed us to introduce the **environment model of evaluation** in the first place. When evaluating `set! <symbol> <value>`, a binding for `symbol` is located in the environment hierarchy if any and it is updated with `value`. If such a binding is not found, an error is signaled.
