# 3.5 Streams

- We had the chance to play a round with **assignment** as a core tool for modeling the changing behavior of real world objects.

- We percepted the world as a set of objects. Each of which has a changing state that affects its behavior. We modeled these states using local variables and we modeled the **change** in these states using **assignment**.

- We identified an advantage in this technique which is the possibility to design more **modular** programs. However, We also put our hands on the troubles raised from introducing **assignment** into computation. These troubles come from modeling real world time using computer time and the fact that our model changes with time. Can we avoid this model change and build models that do not change with time so that they become more predictable, and testable?

- In this chapter, we will see a modeling technique that represents time as a sequence of things rather than a changing local variable so that the model operating on those sequeces does not need to change. By this we will be building models as mathematical functions that operate on such sequences or in other words we will be building mathematical functions that accept the time as a parameter.

- We will be using a data structure named **streams** which looks like a **list** but we will see that implementing **streams** as **lists** does not leverage the power of **streams**. Instead we will use **delayed evaluation** to achieve great results.

## 3.5.1 Streams are Delayed Lists

- Let's build a program that computes the sum of prime numbers within a given interval in 2 styles and compare each of them.

- The first style is gonna be a normal imperative iterative style:

```
(define (sum-primes a b)
  (define (iter count accum)
    (cond
      ((> count b) accum)
      ((prime? count) (iter (+ count 1) (+ accum count)))
      (else (iter (+ count 1) accum))))
  (iter a 0))
```

- The second style is a declarative functional one that uses sequences as a conventional interface:

```
(define (sum-primes a b)
  (accum
    +
    0
    (filter
      prime?
      (enumerate-interval a b))))
```

- Let's compare the 2 styles:

  - The second style looks more elegant than the first in the sense that it has well defined and separated stages. What we do in this style is that we prepare all integers within a given interval, filter them for primality, then summing the primes. It is even easy to describe which is a sign of well design. Usually to measure how well a program is designed, evaluate how much it is easy to describe and understand.
  - The first program is a bit difficult to describe and understand which is a sign of bad design. In this style we define an inner procedure named `iter` accepting 2 parameters: the first one is the counter and the sceond is the accumulator. This inner procedure tests whether the counter is exeeded the interval then all we need to do is to return the accumulator. Otherwise it tests the primality of the counter. If it is prime then it calls `iter` again with the next counter and the accumulater after adding the counter to it. If the counter is not prime, then it calls `iter` again with the next counter and the same accumulater. We start the program by calling `iter` with the interval start as the counter and 0 as the accumulator. Observe how difficult it is to describe and understand. The difficulty of this style in the fact that the stages of the program are dispersed over the whole thing. Ther are no well defined stages.
  - So from code quality perspective, the second style wins.
  - However, the first program is more performant than the second one since the first program does not to store in the memory more than the the inner procedure with its environment of arguments. The second program needs to store the entire sequence of integers in the interval and pass them down the stages. So from performance perspective the first program wins.

- Let's take another example that highlights the performance issue. Let's build a program to get the second prime from 10000 to 10000 using both of the styles:

```
(define (second-prime a b)
  (define (iter count index)
    (if (prime? count)
      (if (eq? index 1)
        count
        (iter (+ count 1) (+ index 1)))
      (iter (+ count 1) index)))
  (iter a 0))
```

```
(define (second-prime a b)
  (car
    (cdr
      (filter
        prime?
        (enumerate-interval a b)))))
```

```
(second-prime 10000 1000000)
```

The same applies here. The second programs is designed in a better way than the first but the first os much more performant. The second program here enumerates over the full thing from 10000 to 10000, filters this huge thing to take the second element. The first one in contrast loops over just what we need.

- The question here is "Can we get the best thing from both worlds?" or "Can we write programs in the elegant style(second one) but get the performance of the first?". In fact we can. We can invent a thing that abstracts sequences in a way that we can use it exactly as normal sequences but it hides a magic inside itself that makes it operate on just what is needed. This thing is **streams**.

- **Streams** are delayed lists in the sense that it looks like normal lists:

```
(car (cons-stream x y)) => x

(cdr (cons-stream x y)) => y
```

But instead of building the a stream as a pair of a `car` and a `cdr`, it just build it as a pair of a `car` and a **promise** to compute the `cdr` once needed:

```
(define (cons-stream x y) (cons x (delay y)))

(define (stream-car z) (car z))

(define (stream-cdr z) (force (car z)))
```

The magic here relies in those `delay` and `force`. `delay` is something that generates a promise to evaluate a given expression. `force` is what causes the promise to compute its inner expression. By this we can use **streams** exactly as we use normal lists but it will be a lazy thing that computes just what's needed to reach a given destiation.

### Implementing delay and force

- Although `delay` and `force` seem like magical things, they are simpler than what anyone expects.
- `delay` just package an expression in a way that can be depacaged later. This can be accomplished by wraping the expression in the body of a procedure so `delay` can be defined like this:

```
(define (delay exp) (lamda () exp))
```

- `force` now can be defined just to call that procedure:

```
(define (force delayed-object) (delayed-object))
```

- This implementation accomplishes what we need. However, there is an optimization step that we can add to avoid recomputing the same thing over and over in recursive programs which can lead to performance issues. We can **memoize** the procedure returned by `delay` so that, the first time it runs it evaluates the expression and stores tha value and subsequent times just returns it.

```
(define (memo-proc proc)
  (let ((already-run? false) (result false))
    (if (not already-run?)
      (begin
        (set! already-run? true)
        (set! result (proc))
        result)
      result)))
```

Now `delay` can be defined in terms of `memo-proc`

```
(define (delay exp) (memo-proc (lamda () exp)))
```

## 3.5.2 Infinite Streams

- Streams can be used to model infinitely long sequences such as the poistive integers sequence:

```
(define (integers-starting-from n)
  (cons-stream n (integers-starting-from (+ 1 n))))

(define integers (integers-starting-from 1))
```

Now `integers` is a pair whose `car` is `1` and whose `cdr` is a prmise which is a nother prime whose `car` is `2` and whose `cdr` is another pair and so one.

- We can define all integers that are not divisble by `7`:

```
(define (divisible? x y) (= (remainder x y) 0))

(define no-sevens
  (stream-filter (lamda (x) (not (divisible? x 7)))
    integers))
```

- We can also define Fibonacci series:

```
(define (fibgen a b)
  (cons-stream a
    (fibgen b (+ a b))))

(define fibs (fibgen 0 1))
```

- We can compute prime numbers using a method named as **seive of Eratosthenes**. This method accepts a stream and computes another stream whose first item is the first item of the input stream and the reset are the output of another seive on the result of filtering the input stream from the elements divisble by the first item of the input stream. This is a recursive operation.

```
(define (seive stream)
  (cons-stream
    (stream-car stream)
    (seive
      (stream-filter
        (lambda (x) (not (divisible? x (stream-car stream))))
        stream))))

(define primes (seive (integers-starting-from 2)))
```

### Defining Streams Implicitly

- Defining infinite streams using the recursive ability of procedures is not the only way. The **delayed evaluation** of streams adds recursive ability to them exactly like procedures. We can define `ones` stream to be a stream of `1`s:

```
(define ones (cons-stream 1 ones))
```

Here `ones` is a pair whose first item is `1` and the second is a promise to evaluate `ones` which generates another `1` and so on.

- We can define more interesting things. Consider this `add-streams` procedure that element-wist sumes 2 streams:

```
(define (add-streams s1 s2)
  (stream-map + s1 s2))
```

Using it we can define `integers` stream:

```
(define integers
  (cons-stream 1 (add-streams ones integers)))
```

`integers` is a pair whose first item is `1` and the second is a promise to sum streams `ones` and `integers` which gives generates `2` then `3` and so on. This works because at anypoint there is enough of `integers` stream to be fed into `add-streams` along with `ones` stream.

- We can also define Fibonacci series in the same way:

```
(define fibs
  (cons-stream 0
    (cons-stream 1
      (add-streams fibs (stream-cdr fibs)))))
```

`fibs` is a stream whose first item is `0`, second item is `1` and the reset obtaines from summing the the same stream with its `cdr` which generates for the third item `1`, the forth item `2`, the fifth item `3`, the sixth item `5` and so on.

### Exercise 3.53

Powers of 2 => 1 2 4 8 16

### Exercise 3.54

```
(define (mul-streams s1 s2)
  (stream-map * s1 s2))
```

```
(define factorials (cons-stream 1 (mul-streams factorials integers)))
```

### Exercise 3.55

```
(define (partial-sums s)
  (define
    partial-sums-stream
    (cons-stream
      (stream-car s)
      (add-streams (stream-cdr s) partial-sums-stream)))
  partial-sums-stream)
```

## 3.5.3 Exploiting the Stream Paradigm

- Streams can be a very powerful modeling tools that avoids the drawbacks of using state variables and the hassle of introducing assignment.

### Formulating iterations as stream processes

- Previously, we discussed the difference between recursive and iterative processes. Recall this procedure for caclulating factorial generating recursive process:

```
(define (factorial n)
  (if (= n 0)
    1
    (* n (factorial (- n 1)))))
```

And recall this version generating iterative process:

```
(define (factorial n)
  (define (iter counter product)
    (if
      (> counter n)
      product
      (iter (+ counter 1) (* counter product))))
  (iter 1 1))
```

This algorithm works by capturing the state of the calculation inside `counter` and `product` variables(procedure args). That is what makes the process resulted iterative(capturing the entire problem state inside those variables so that no state lags in the stack). We can use streams to model the problem using a simpler and more intuitive approach:

```
(define (factorial n)
  (define factorial-stream
    (cons-stream 1 (stream-mul factorial-stream integers)))
  (stream-ref factorial-stream n))
```

This algorithm models the mathematical fact `factorial(n) = n * factorial(n - 1)` inisde `factorial-stream` and then to get the factorial of a number, it is as simple as referencing an item from the stream. It avoids the **imperative** approach used inside the algorithm generating iterative process and also avoids the potential memory problems of the one generating recursive process. Despite the fact that the one generating recursive process and the stream-based one share the same memory complexity `O(n)`, stream-based is still better in the sense that storing list items is better than stack frames since stack frames might lead to stack overflow problem.

### Infinite streams of pairs

- Previously we discussed how we could use the sequence paradigm to represent nested loops programs as processes. Now let's use the stream paradim to generalize this to fit infinite sequences. Recall the procedure `prime-sum-pairs` that generates all pairs such that the sum of the pair is prime.

- Using the stream paradigm, if we have the stream `int-pairs` of all pairs (i, j) whose i >= j, then all we have to do is to filter this stream to genrate only pairs whose sum is prime:

```
(sream-filter
  (lambd (x) (prime? (+ (car x) (cadr x))))
  int-pairs)
```

- Now our job is just to prepare this `int-pairs` stream. Constructing all possible pairs of integers:
  (1, 1) (1, 2) (1, 3) ...
  (2, 1) (2, 2) (2, 3) ...
  (3, 1) (3, 2) (3, 3) ...

It seems that the stream we need to prepare is the one above the diagonal of that rectangle:
(1, 1) (1, 2) (1, 3) ...
(2, 2) (2, 3) ...
(3, 3) ...

We can divide this shape into 3 parts:

- the first pair
- the rest of the pairs of the first row
- the pairs of the rest of the rows

Note that the 3rd part is recursively generated from the first 2. We can construct the needed stream like this:

```
(define (pairs s t)
  (cons-stream
    (list (stream-car s) (stream-car t))
    (interleave
      (stream-map
        (lambda (x) (list (stream-car s) x))
        (stream-cdr t))
      (pairs (stream-cdr s) (stream-cdr t)))))

(pairs integers integers)
```

- `interleave` procedure can be built to interleave 2 streams not just append to avoid going the full way with the first row without ever reaching other rows:

```
(define (interleave s1 s2)
  (if
    (stream-null? s1)
    (s2)
    (cons-stream
      (stream-car s1)
      (interleave s2 (stream-cdr s1)))))
```

### Exercise 3.67

```
(define (pairs s t)
  (interleave
    (stream-map
      (lambda (x) (list (stream-car s) x))
      t)
    (pairs (stream-cdr s) t)))
```

### Streams as signals

- When we first itroduced streams, we introduced it as a new perception of the real world and it is similar to how a signal processing engineer perceive systems. Actually, streams can be used to model signal processing systems in a very intuitive way.

- Let's model an integrator that integrates a signal. A signal is represented as a stream. Our job is to scale the input(`integrand`) stream by a given factor and sum it with the output(`integral`) stream starting from a given constant.

```
(define (integral integrand initial-value dt)
  (define int
    (cons-stream
      initial-value
      (add-streams
        (scale-stream integrand dt)
        int)))
  int)
```

### Exercise 3.73

```
(define (RC R C dt)
  (lambda (i v0)
    (add-streams
      (scale-steam i R)
      (integral (scale-stream i (/ 1 c)) v0 dt))))
```

## 3.5.4 Streams and Delayed Evaluation

## 3.5.5 Modularity of Functional Programs and Modularity of Objects

- The reason why we introduced assignment in our programming language is that it provdies a way that increases program modularity by hiding state inside local variables. A good example was modeling **monte carlo** method to come up with an estime to `pi`. The bottleneck is this program was to model `rand` procedure to generate random numbers. We used assignment to keep the previous random value to be fed into `rand-update` procedure to generate the next random value. Now let's see how **streams** can be used to ptovide the same level of modularity without the hassle of assignent.

- Let's start by building a stream of random numbers:

```
(define random-numbers
  (cons-stream
    random-init
    (stream-map rand-update random-numbers)))
```

- Then let's feed this `random-numbers` stream into the **cesaro** expirement to generate a stream of booleans indicating for each successive pairs of random numbers, whether they have factors in common or not:

```
(define cesaro-stream
  (map-successive-pairs
    (lambda (r1 r2) (= (gcd r1 r2) 1))
    random-numbers))
```

```
(define (map-successive-pairs f s)
  (cons-stream
    (f (stream-car s) (stream-car (ctream-cdr s)))
    (map-successive-pairs (stream-cdr (stream-cdr s)))))
```

- Last but not least let's build the **monte carlo** method to accept a stream representing the expirement:

```
(define (monte-carlo expirement-stream passed failed)
  (define (next passed failed)
    (cons-stream
      (/ passed (+ passed failed))
      (monte-carlo (stream-cdr expirement-stream) passed failed)))
  (if
    (stream-car expirement)
    (next (+ 1 passed) failed)
    (next passed (+ 1 failed))))
```

- Finally, let's use **monte carlo** to estimate pi:

```
(define pi
  (stream-map
    (lambda (p) (sqrt (/ 6 p)))
    (monte-carlo cesaro-stream 0 0)))
```
