# 1.1 The elements of programming

- A **framework** is a structure of a building, vehicle, or any object.

- A **programming language** is not just a set of instructions to tell the computer what it should do. Any programming language must provide a way to build complex ideas. Programming languages accomplish this through three mechanisms:

  - **Primitive expressions**<br>
    the simplest elements the programming language deals with.

  - **Means of combination**<br>
    by which compound elements are built from simpler ones.

  - **Means of abstraction**<br>
    by which compound elements are labeled and thus can be manipulated as units.

- **Types of elements** in a programming language

  - **data**<br>
    stuff that is manipulated.

  - **procedures**<br>
    descriptions of the rules to manipulate data.

## 1.1.1 Expressions

- A **combination** is an expression formed by a list of expressions surrounded by paretethesis which denote procedure application.

## 1.1.2 Naming and the Environment

- A very crucial aspect of any programing language is the means it provides for labeling computational objects.

```
define PI 3.14
define radius 10
define circumference (* 2 PI radius)
```

**This is the simplest form of abstraction**. No we can use `PI` to refer to a mathematical constant without having to know its value **(details)**. Also we can use it to build a **compund** element like `circumference`. As well as we can use `circumference` **as a unit** to build more complex elements.

## 1.1.3 Evaluating combinations

- **Combination evaluation algorithm**

  1. Evaluate the subexpressions
  2. Apply the leftmost expression(opertor) to the rest of expressions(operands).

- This is a **recursive** process since it invokes itself as one of its steps.

- A **number**(like 200) is expressed with digits(2 0 0) while a **numeral**(like Two hundred) is a word that refers to a number.

## 1.1.4 Compound procedures

- We saw our first form of abstraction before as **labeling data expressions**:

```
(define PI 13.14)
```

- A more powerfull form of abstraction is **labeling compound procedures**:

```
(define (square x) (* x x))
```

Here we defined a compound procedure that multiply something by itself and labeled it `square`.

The general sytax for defining and labeling procedures is

```
(define (<name> <parameters>) <body>)
```

- Compound procedures, like `square`, can also be used to form more complex procedures

```
(define (sum-of-squares x y) (+ (square x) (square y)))
```

## 1.1.5 The substitution model for procedure application

- The **substitution model** for **compound procedure application** is not much different from the **evaluation algorithm** for **combinations** of **primitive procedures** examined before.

  1. evaluate the subexpressions(operands).
  2. substituate the compound procedure by its definition after replacing the formal parameters with the given arguments.

- Example:

  - If we have those procedures defined:

  ```
  (define (square a) (* a a))
  ```

  ```
  (define (sum-of-squares a b) (+ (square a) (square b)))
  ```

  ```
  (define (f a) (sum-of-squares (+ a 1) (* a 2)))
  ```

  - Then the substituation model for appling the procedure `f` with the formal parameter `a` equals the argument `5` goes as follows:

  ```
  (f 5)
  ```

  1. start by evaluating the subexpressions: the numeral `5` is evaluated to the number `5`
  2. substitute `f` by its definition replacing the formal parameter `a` by the number `5`

  ```
  (sum-of-squares (+ 5 1) (* 5 2))
  ```

  3. evaluate the subexpressions: the combination `(+ 5 1)` is evaluated to the number `6` and the combination `(* 5 2)` is evaluated to the number `10`

  ```
  (sum-of-squares 6 10)
  ```

  4. substitute `sum-of-squares` by its definition replacing the formal parameter `a` by the number `6` and the formal parameter `b` by the number `10`

  ```
  (+ (square 6) (square 10))
  ```

  5. evaluate the subexpressions:

  - evaluate the combination `(square 6)`:
    1. evaluate the subexpressions: the numeral `6` is evaluated to the number `6`
    2. substitute the procedure `square` with its definition replacing the formal parameter `a` by the number `6`
    ```
    (* 6 6)
    ```
    which evaluate to `36`
  - evaluate the combination `(square 10)` following the same steps to `100`

  ```
  (+ 36 100)
  ```

  6. apply the primitive procedure `+` to the subexpressions `36` and `100`. We end up with:

  ```
  136
  ```

### Applicative order versus Normal order

- **Applicative order** is defined as **(evaluate the arguments and then apply)**.

```
(sum-of-squares (+ 5 1) (* 5 2))
```

```
(sum-of-squares 6 10)
```

```
(+ (square 6) (square 10))
```

```
(+ (* 6 6) (* 10 10))
```

```
(+ 36 100)
```

```
136
```

- **Normal order** is defined as **(fully expand and then reduce)**.

```
(sum-of-squares (+ 5 1) (* 5 2))
```

```
(+ (square (+ 5 1)) (square (* 5 2)))
```

```
(+ (* (+ 5 1) (+ 5 1)) (* (* 5 2) (* 5 2)))
```

```
(+ (* 6 6) (* 10 10))
```

```
(+ 36 100)
```

```
136
```

## 1.1.6 Conditional expressions and predicates

- A **predicate** is an expression that evaluates to `true` or `false`.
- Doing **tests** and performing different actions based on the result of a test is a crucial part of any programming language. **LISP** providesmultiple tools for doing that. Let's say we have this **case analysis**:<br>
  x if x > 0<br>
  |x| = 0 if x = 0<br>
  -x if x < 0<br>
  We can model this **case analysis** in **LISP** using different tools:

  - Using `cond`:

  ```
  cond (p1 e1)
       (p2 e2)
       .
       .
       (pn en)
  ```

  `p` refers to a **predicate** and `e` refers to an **expression**.<br>
  this pair of a **predicate and an expression** `(p e)` is called a **clause**.<br>

  ```
  (define (abs x)
    (cond ((> x 0) x)
          ((= x 0) 0)
          ((< x 0) (-x)))
  ```

  - Using `else` which is a special case of `cond`:

  ```
  cond (p e)
       (else e)
  ```

  ```
  (define (abs x)
    (cond ((< x 0) (-x))
          (else x)))
  ```

  In fact `else` can be replaced by any **predicate** that evaluates always to `true`.

  - Using `if`:

  ```
  if <predicate> <consequent> <alternative>
  ```

  ```
  (define (abs x)
          (if (< x 0)
              (- x)
              x))
  ```

- `>`, `<`, and `=` are **primitive predicates** called **comparison operators**.
- `and`, `or`, and `not` are another type of **primitive predicates** called **logical operators**
  - `and`
  ```
  (and e1 e2 .. en)
  ```
  The interpreter evaluates expression by expression left to right. If it finds an expression that evaluates to `false`, then `false` is returned. If all expressions evaluates to `true` then the value of the last expression is returned.
  - `or`
  ```
  (or e1 e2 .. en)
  ```
  The interpreter evaluates expression by expression left to right. If it finds an expression that evaluates to `true`, then the value of this expression is returned. If all expressions evaluates to `false` then `false` is returned.
  - `not`
  ```
  (not e)
  ```
  The interpreter evaluates e. If it evaluates to `true` then `false` is returned. If it evaluates to `false` then `true` is returned.

## Exercises

### Exercise 1.1

| Expression                                        | Interpreter Evaluation |
| ------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| 10                                                | 10                     |
| (+ 5 3 4)                                         | 12                     |
| (- 9 1)                                           | 8                      |
| (/ 6 2)                                           | 3                      |
| (+ (\* 2 4) (- 4 6))                              | 6                      |
| (define a 3)                                      |                        |
| (define b (+ a 1))                                |                        |
| (+ a b (\* a b))                                  | 19                     |
| (= a b)                                           | false                  |
| (if (and (> b a) (< b (\* a b))) b a)             | 4                      |
| (cond ((= a 4) 6) ((= b 4) (+ 6 7 a)) (else 25))  | 16                     |
| (+ 2 (if (> b a) b a))                            | 6                      |
| \* (cond ((> a b) a)((< a b) b)(else -1))(+ a 1)) | 16                     |

---

### Exercise 1.2

$$ {5 + 4 + (2 - (3 - (6 + 4/5))) \over 3(6 - 2)(2 - 7)} $$

Prefix Notation:<br>

```
/ (+ 5 4 (- 2 (- 3 (+ 6 (/ 4 5))))) (\* 3 (- 6 2) (- 2 7))
```

---

### Exercise 1.3

```
(define (square x) (* x x))

(define (sum-squares x y) (+ (square x) (square y)))

(define (sum-squares-two-large a b c)
        (cond (and (< a b) (< a c)) (sum-squares b c)
              (and (< b a) (< b c)) (sum-squares a c)
              else (sum-squares a b))
        )
```

---

### Exercise 1.4

```
(define (a-plus-abs-b a b)
        ((if (> b 0) + -) a b))
```

## If b > 0 then return a + b otherwise return a - b

### Exercise 1.5

```
(define (p) (p))

(define (test x y)
       (if (= x 0) 0 y)
       )

(test 0 p)
```

If the interpreter uses **applicative order**, it will evaluate the arguments first and on evaluating `p` procedure it will invoke itself and the interpreter will stuck at this point and not returning anything. On the other hand, if the interpreter uses **normal order**, it will expand first and then testing `x` equals to zero which is `true` then it returns `0` without the need to evaluate `p`

---

## 1.1.7

- A **mathematical function** is a rule or relationship that maps each item `x` of its domain to a unique value `y` of its domain and can be represented as `y = f(x)`.
- A **procedure** is much like a **mathematical function** in the sense that it maps values of a given domain to values of other domain.
- The distinction between a **mathematical function** and a **procedure** is that the latter must be **effective**.
- A **mathematical function** defines a **relationship(what)** between 2 domains but it has nothing to do with **the steps(how)** to map a given value to another while a **procedure** is concerned with the **how**.
- In short, a **mathematical function** communicates **declarative knowledge(what)** while a **procedure** communicates **imperative knowledge(how)**,
- For instance, look at the **square root mathematical function**

```
sqrt(x) = y such that y >= 0 and y^2 = x
```

This definition does not help at all in constructing the **steps** to calculate the square root. This only defines the **relationship**.

### Exercise 1.6

```
(define (new-if predicate consequent alternative)
        (cond
          (predicate consequent)
          (else alternative)
        )
)
```

Since the interpreter uses **applicative** order, arguments will be evaluated before substituting the procedure `new-if`. This will result in evaluating the third parameter to the `new-if` procedure **(alternative)** `(sqrt-iter (improve guess x) x)` which will be evaluated to `new-if` and `new-if` will be evaluated to `sqrt-iter` infinitely.

### Exercise 1.7

```
(define (average x y)
        (/ (+ x y) 2)
)

(define (square x) (* x x))

(define (improve guess x)
        (average guess (/ x guess))
)
```

```
(define (good-enough? guess x)
        (< (abs (- (square guess) x)) 0.001)
)

(define (sqrt-iter guess x)
       (if (good-enough? guess x)
           guess
           (sqrt-iter (improve guess x) x)
       )
)

(define (sqrt x)
        (sqrt-iter 1.0 x)
)
```

```
(define (good-enough? guess previous-guess)
        (< (abs (- previous-guess guess)) 0.001)
)

(define (sqrt-iter guess previous-guess x)
       (if (good-enough? guess previous-guess)
           guess
           (sqrt-iter (improve guess x) guess x)
       )
)

(define (sqrt x)
        (sqrt-iter 1.0 1.1 x)
)
```

### Exercie 1.8

```
(define (improve guess x)
        (/ (+ (/ x (square guess)) (* 2 guess)) 3)
)
```

---

## 1.8 Procedures as Black-Box Abstractions

- **Dividing** a big problem into subproblems is crucial for software development. In fact, not any division for the problem works. The problem must be divided into subproblems that can be **defined and treated as a unit outside of the big problem** and hence its procedure can be **reused** in other problems as **black box abstractions**.

- The **distinction** between a **procedure** and a **procedural abstraction** is the same distinction between **imperative knowledge** and **declarative** knowledge. A **procedure (imperative)** defines an **approach** for doing something while a **procedural abstraction** is the **fact** that a given procedure does a given job without investigating how.

  - This is a **procedure**

  ```
  (define (square x) (* x x))
  ```

  - While this is a **procedural abstraction**

  ```
  (square x)

  (square 2) => 4

  (square 3) => 9
  ```

### Local names

- A procedure definition **binds** its formal parameters in the sense that they cannot be used outside the procedure definition. Thus we say the procedure definition is the **scope** of its formal parameters.

- **Bound variable vs. free variable**

  - **Bound variable** is a variable that is **binded** by a given scope.
  - **Free variable** is a variable that is **not binded** by a given scope.

- **Renaming bound variables** should **have no effect** on procedure definition while **renaming free variables has effect**.

- A variable is not bound or free of its own. A variable is bound or free for a given scope. For example:

```
(define (good-enough? guess x)
        (define (square y) (* y y))
        (< (abs (- (square guess) x)) 0.001))
```

the **name(variable)** `x` is **bound** for the procedure `good-enough?` while it is **free** for the procedure `square`.

### Internal definitions and block structure

- You can define auxiliary procedures inside the procedures that will use them as what we did in the last example(defining `square` procedure inside `good-enough?` procedure).
- This is very helpful to avoid naming conflict.
