# 1.1 The elements of programming

- A **framework** is a structure of a building, vehicle, or any object.

- A **programming language** is not just a set of instructions to tell the computer what it should do. Any programming language must provide a way to build complex ideas. Programming languages accomplish this through three mechanisms:
  - **Primitive expressions**<br>
  the simplest elements the programming language deals with.

  - **Means of combination**<br>
  by which compound elements are built from simpler ones.

  - **Means of abstraction**<br>
  by which compound elements are labeled and thus can be manipulated as units.

- **Types of elements** in a programming language
  - **data**<br>
  stuff that is manipulated.

  - **procedures**<br>
  descriptions of the rules to manipulate data.

## 1.1.1 Expressions
- A **combination** is an expression formed by a list of expressions surrounded by paretethesis which denote procedure application.

## 1.1.2 Naming and the Environment
- A very crucial aspect of any programing language is the means it provides for labeling computational objects.
```
define PI 3.14
define radius 10
define circumference (* 2 PI radius)
```
**This is the simplest form of abstraction**. No we can use `PI` to refer to a mathematical constant without having to know its value **(details)**. Also we can use it to build a **compund** element like `circumference`. As well as we can use `circumference` **as a unit** to build more complex elements.

## 1.1.3 Evaluating combinations
- **Combination evaluation algorithm**
  1. Evaluate the subexpressions
  2. Apply the leftmost expression(opertor) to the rest of expressions(operands).

- This is a **recursive** process since it invokes itself as one of its steps.

- A **number**(like 200) is expressed with digits(2 0 0) while a **numeral**(like Two hundred) is a word that refers to a number.

## 1.1.4 Compound procedures
- We saw our first form of abstraction before as **labeling data expressions**:
```
(define PI 13.14)
```

- A more powerfull form of abstraction is **labeling compound procedures**:
```
(define (square x) (* x x))
```
Here we defined a compound procedure that multiply something by itself and labeled it `square`.

The general sytax for defining and labeling procedures is
```
(define (<name> <parameters>) <body>)
```

- Compound procedures, like `square`, can also be used to form more complex procedures
```
(define (sum-of-squares x y) (+ (square x) (square y)))
```